Only in Silence the Word
A Blindfolded Day, Part 1

A faint sound of singing voices reaches from the waking world into my dreaming mind and gently pulls me from one world to the other.  I awake to a tiny bit of pre-dawn greyness slipping into my down-filled sleeping bag cocoon. I reach out of my sleeping bag into the crisp air and grab my camo bandana.  I fold it along the diagonal into a many layered two inch strip of fabric.  Still in my sleeping bag I place the folded bandana over my eyes and tie it behind my head.  The pre-dawn greyness is replaced with inky blackness.  I won’t be removing this bandana, I hope, until I hear the wake up song tomorrow morning.  Between now and then lies 300 miles and 24 hours of unseen and unforeseen experiences.

> *Only In Silence the Word*
- Ursula K. Le Guin

Close your eyes for a bit.  Close your eyes and imagine (or, if you’re feeling some gumption, just do it), imagine yourself getting up, walking to the closest bathroom from wherever you are, finding the toilet, relieving yourself, cleaning up, and returning to where you are.  Now open your eyes.  How did you do? What senses did you use for each of those tasks? Are you checking yourself out now with your eyes to make sure you didn’t pee on yourself or have TP stuck to your foot?

Also, as you're following along with this story, consider trying not to visualize the story as it unfolds.  There actually are no visuals in this story.  Instead, try to hear the story, smell the story, taste the story, and touch the story.  Incredibly strangely, the story of the day now strongly exists for me in visual memory, but I will attempt to tell it through the other senses as much as I can.

 I’m now lying blind in my sleeping bag on the grass in Del Valle park a bit east of the Bay Area in California.  I can feel the contrast between the warmth in my sleeping bag and the cool air on my face.  There are 45-ish others scattered around the field.  I can hear the sounds of nylon on nylon, zippers, scattered voices, and some of the louder footsteps.  I’m trying to pick out individuals by their sounds.  It’s easiest by voice, possible for some by laugh, for some by memory of location, and some I make guesses at by the swish of the their pants or sound of their footfalls.  I can see only blackness.

I don’t lay there long.  We’re in the middle of a three day road trip from Linne Doran, WA to Quail Springs Permaculture, CA.  We need to get camp packed up and on the road so we can make it to Quail Springs by mid-day.  We’ve spent a layover day here in Del Valle so I’ve been able to build up a rough mental map of the camp area.  I’d spent time the night before packing up most of my stuff and leaving the stuff I’d need for the morning in very specific spots.  I didn’t want to hold up our departure time.

I’d had the intention of taking on this challenge today for the past couple weeks.  But only yesterday, as I had started to go through all the things I would likely have to do today, did I begin to appreciate that it might actually be substantially challenging.

Yesterday, I’d told Melissa my intention of spending the 24-hours blindfolded.  As I’d been preparing my stuff I’d started to realize the potential enormity of what I was attempting and the reality of how dependant on other people I was going to be.  Fortunately Melissa was willing to support me on this endeavor though she was slightly caught off guard and a bit concerned that I was nuts.

I feel around outside my sleeping bag for my shoes.  My hand first touches the rough nylon tarp we are sleeping on and then the cold wet grass.  There they are, slightly damp, but recognizably my shoes.  My first success.  I wiggle myself out of my sleeping bag and into a squatting position.  I can feel the crisp tarp under foot, my smooth sleeping bag and rough wool blanket under my hands.  I feel around again for my shoes, find them again, and put them on.

There is no autopilot.  My bubble of spacial awareness has dropped from miles to inches.  Everything requires full concentration.  Nothing that might be needed later can be put down without a mental note of where it was put down, and how to find that place again.

The tasks of this morning revolve around interpreting my mental map of the place and the tasks through the new lenses of different senses, primarily sound and touch.  I find the tarp that protectors our gear with what feels like an educated guess of direction and an uncomfortable walk that somehow ends with my legs bumping into the tarp.  I take down the tarp by following the edges with my hands, carefully counting the guylines and stakes as I remove them and place them in my pockets.  I do a lot of feeling around on the wet grass in 360-degree circles.

Finally, all my sleeping and tarping gear is packed into my bag.  I think.  How can I know?  Am I going to leave something here?  This is unclear.  Melissa arrives and hands me a bowl of oatmeal.  She assures me that no random items are lying around.  How much is Melissa going to have to do for me today?  Will she get frustrated with this? I ask her to let me know if this gets out of hand for her.  She tells me she is fine for now but that we need to get moving.  She heads off to continue to pack and I head in the direction that I think is the bathroom.

My mental map reminds me that we’re camped in a field with a few scattered Oaks and Pines.  The bathroom outbuilding is about 50 yards away.  I walk slowly, following voices and footsteps.  Someone walks by me and assures me I am indeed headed for the bathroom.  I trust them.  No one seems overly surprised I’m wearing a blindfold.  It’s that kind of group.

I can hear some women chatting from what sounds like inside the outbuilding.  I think I’m standing outside it somewhere.  It doesn’t sound like there is anyone else outside.  “Is anyone here?” I ask timidly.  Someone answers, it’s a female.  I realize that when people are quiet I have very little idea if they are near me.  “Can you point me in the direction of the door to the men’s room?” I ask, probably even more timidly.  With the (hopefully) correct entrance found I keep my fingertips on the wall to stay oriented as walk inside. “Good luck” a fellow says as he passes me on the way out.

Inside, I do what I need to do, finding and flushing the toilet with my shoes to keep my hands away from the unknown.  I find the sink and wash up, wondering if I’ve peed on myself or if I have TP on my shoe.  Thankfully I don’t have to figure out how to put my contacts in I think to myself.

I exit and wander around hoping to bump into my bag that I left outside.  Next time I need to leave it right next to the door.  Someone comes out of the bathroom and points me in the right direction.  I hear Melissa in the women’s room so I wait for her.  She comes out, I shoulder my bag and we walk down to the vans carrying a plastic bin between us.  We walk much quicker than I’m able to safely ensure I won’t bash my face into a tree, walk into a picnic table, or trip over a rock.  I trust in Melissa’s eyes, mediated by our connection through the plastic bin.  She lets me know when the curbs are coming.

I realize that since we have a schedule to keep I’m going to need to be led around by others quite a bit.  We drop off our gear to get packed into the trailer.  I keep my small backpack of essentials for the day on my back.  We bring some more of the camp kitchen gear down to the vans with the same method carrying it between us.  I begin to get slightly more comfortable with walking faster than I want to.

It’s time for our morning circle up before we all jump in the vans and depart.  Melissa seems to want a break from leading me around so someone else leads me over to the circle.  I don’t know who is standing next to me in the circle until they speak to me.  How many people are in the circle right now, I wonder.  I have no idea.

There’s a loud sound of cracking and splintering wood that rockets through the otherwise relatively quiet morning.  It sounds like a tree is falling down.  It comes from behind and above me.  The sound is not close enough for me to feel concerned that it is falling on me, but it is not very far either.  I hear a collective gasp and an “oh no.”  I hear a couple people quickly leave the circle, but not many.  I hear a command barked out from the direction that I heard the crack: “Don’t move, you’ve just fallen out of tree.”  There’s a very thick feeling of unease in the silence that follows.  I have my first very strong urge to remove my blindfold.

We start singing songs in the circle.  I can hear the tension of the unknown in the others voices.  I’m assuming the accident is being tended to by a small group.  I have no idea if the person who fell is alive or dead.

After an eternity, I hear his voice, hear as he is welcomed into the circle clearly walking and okay.  I can feel the tension break away from myself and the circle.  I still have very little idea what happened.  Yikes, I think to myself.  I’m not capable of functioning autonomously.  In an emergency situation I would probably be taking this blindfold off.  I certainly hadn’t expected to be experiencing emergency situations.

And we haven’t even gone anywhere yet.  I may indeed be nuts, I think to myself.

To be continued…
